Dear Secretary, 

The Online Safety Amendment (Social Media Minimum Age) Bill 2024 has
the admirable goal of protecting children from online harms. However,
the way it intends to do so is deeply flawed and has wide-reaching
implications for the children the Bill seeks to protect, and on
Australians more generally. 

Firstly, while I appreciate the opportunity for public consultation on
the Bill the consultation window leaves much to be desired. Much of the
prior movement in this area was at events such as the Social Media
Summit which was extremely one-sided in favour of the restrictions.
This has seen many interests unheard until now, and even then given
less than 48 hours over two work/school days for people to submit their
thoughts.  Given the wide-reaching implications of this legislation that
are detailed below, I would hope that at minimum the Government allows
more time for all cases to be made. 

Secondly I want to examine the implications for the children the Bill
seeks to protect, and how this may harm the most vulnerable children
more than it helps. While I agree that these children are more
vulnerable online than others, for many of these children online spaces
serve as a safe space for them to exist away from parents and
schoolmates that may be judgemental or abusive, [especially for queer
children](1) and children in abusive families. Action does need to be
taken to protect these children from the harms social media may cause,
but a blanket ban risks throwing the baby out with the bathwater,
especially as there has been limited evidence that a ban would help in
the first place. 

I note that some online communities can encourage harmful behaviour
among children such as those promoting eating disorders or self harm -
platforms should be made to act upon these specific users and
communities, not on children broadly. Additionally I note that the most
vulnerable children are especially susceptible to blackmail and
grooming, and encourage the government to tackle these issues head-on
such as by ensuring that these children are [adequately supported in
schools both to help prevent this from occurring and assist them when
it does happen](2). 

I want to note that there has been no clarification on what counts as
"reasonable steps" for the purposes of age verification. This means
that the Bill will be either ineffective or extremely invasive to all
Australian internet users, especially adults. This is especially true
if it forces users provide their ID to service providers at a time when
trust in these providers is at a low point.

In summary - children need to be protected but shutting them off
from the online world entirely will leave them more exposed to harm in
the real world, unable to find support groups beyond their local
communities and force adults to submit sensitive personal data to all
manner of services. 

Thanks for reading this submission, 

Stuart Rutherford 

[1]: https://heterosexualnonsense.substack.com/p/labors-social-media-ban-is-dangerous
[2]: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-04/students-say-social-media-literacy-key-not-age-restrictions/104170166

